JUDY WOODRUFF: Good evening. I'm
Judy Woodruff. Gwen Ifill is on
assignment.
On the "NewsHour" tonight: A
historic flood leaves much of
South Carolina underwater.
Then, this Politics Monday,
Hillary Clinton weighs in to the
debate over gun control,
and, in Congress, a fight over
who will be the next speaker of
the House.
Plus, an investigation into the
nation's silent mass disaster,
when people go missing and
their families are
left in the dark.
ALICE ALMENDAREZ, Daughter: You
can't celebrate a holiday when
there's somebody missing from
the room. I actually was
supposed to get married an, I
didn't get married, because I
couldn't
get married without my dad.
JUDY WOODRUFF: All that and more
on tonight's "PBS NewsHour."
(BREAK)
JUDY WOODRUFF: South Carolina
lay stricken today, with cities,
towns and roads inundated
by the worst flooding on record.
Days of nonstop rain have killed
nine people, driven hundreds
into shelters, and left
thousands more without power or
drinkable water.
Some of the worst was in the
state's capital, as William
Brangham reports.
WILLIAM BRANGHAM: Parts of
Columbia, South Carolina, were
simply swallowed up today by
the rising waters. It was
chest-high and higher in some
parts of the city. And, even as
the
rain began finally tapering
off, there were new warnings.
GOV. NIKKI HALEY (R), South
Carolina: This is not over. Just
because the rain stops doesn't
mean that we are
out of the woods.
WILLIAM BRANGHAM: In a briefing
today, Governor Nikki Haley
appealed to people not to take
chances.
GOV. NIKKI HALEY: I do want to
see that -- say that we have had
word that there are people
who are taking their boats to
the Lake Murray Dam to take
pictures of all the water that
we're trying to release. That is
extremely dangerous and this is
-- I can't stress enough
that this is not a fun event.
WILLIAM BRANGHAM: All that water
is the result of a slow-moving
storm system that lingered
over the Southeast and sucked in
moisture from Hurricane Joaquin
spinning out in the
Atlantic. On Sunday alone, more
than 16 inches of rain fell on
the Gills Creek area near
Columbia. That's one of the
largest totals on one day
anywhere in the United States in
15 years.
Hundreds of people also had to
be rescued around Columbia. This
video captured one dramatic
moment, as a Coast Guard team
aboard a helicopter pulled a
mother and her small child to
safety.
The flooding also shut down some
550 roads and bridges across the
state and 75 miles
of Interstate 95, and officials
warned it could take weeks to
reopen everything.
State Adjutant General
Bob Livingston Jr.:
MAJ. GEN. BOB LIVINGSTON JR.,
South Carolina Adjutant General:
The roads are still unsafe.
A lot of them have been
undermined by the flooding. And
so the road may look perfect
on top, but if you drive across
it, it could collapse. We have
had that happen to our rescue
crews. And we're having to do
engineering evaluations on
those, so, again, don't get
out unless you have to.
WILLIAM BRANGHAM: Elsewhere,
cemeteries, like this one in
Springfield, were so saturated
that coffins were coming out of
the ground. And on the coast,
Charleston reported its
worst flooding since Hurricane
Hugo roared through back in
1989.
Not far away, in Summerville,
drone footage showed entire
neighborhoods submerged around
Cane Bay.
Governor Haley warned recovery
will be slow, as the surging
waters continue following their
paths to the ocean.
GOV. NIKKI HALEY: This is going
to be a process. It is going to
be one where we have to
prioritize
and we have to stay on it. It's
going to be one where we're
going to be OK, but we are
really going to have to
take it one step at a time.
WILLIAM BRANGHAM: Meanwhile,
Columbia and two of its
surrounding counties are under
a nighttime curfew, and some
375,000 people have been warned
to boil their tapwater to
make it drinkable.
I'm William Brangham for
the "PBS NewsHour."
JUDY WOODRUFF: As the storm
slowly moved on today, more rain
fell in the low-lying
northeastern
part of the state.
In the day's other news, a cargo
ship that was caught in the path
of Hurricane Joaquin
has sunk with 33 people on
board. The Coast Guard said
today it's found a body and
debris
near the Bahamas, where the
El Faro was last heard from.
A Coast Guard officer leading
the search from Jacksonville,
Florida, said the chances that
anyone survived are slim.
CAPT. MARK FEDOR, U.S. Coast
Guard: If the vessel did sink on
Thursday and that crew
was able to abandon ship, they
would have been abandoning ship
into a Category 4 hurricane.
So, you are talking up to
140-mile-an-hour winds, seas
upwards of 50 feet, visibility
basically at zero. Those are
challenging conditions to
survive in.
JUDY WOODRUFF: The ship's owner
says the vessel's captain had
planned to sail out of harm's
way, but the main
engines failed.
Tensions over the Russian air
campaign in Syria escalated
today after a Russian fighter
jet crossed into Turkey over the
weekend. Moscow said it was an
unintentional violation,
as its planes targeted the
Islamic State, or ISIL, but NATO
member Turkey protested.
In Brussels, the head of NATO
met with Turkey's foreign
minister and called the
violation
unacceptable.
JENS STOLTENBERG, NATO
Secretary-General: I call on
Russia to fully respect NATO
airspace,
and to avoid escalating tensions
with the alliance. I urge Russia
to take the necessary
steps to align its efforts with
those of the international
community in the fight against
ISIL.
JUDY WOODRUFF: The U.S. and NATO
have charged the Russian
airstrikes are also targeting
the Western-backed rebels in
Syria. Meanwhile, The New York
Times reports that the U.S. will
back a major offensive by rebel
factions and Kurdish fighters
against ISIL fighters in
Northeast Syria.
In Iraq, at least 56 people were
killed today in a string of car
bombings that bore the
Islamic State hallmark. The
worst attack hit in a Shiite
town in Eastern Iraq, followed
by a blast in Baghdad and
another outside Basra in the
south. The Sunni militants of
ISIL have frequently targeted
Shiites across Iraq.
Elsewhere in the Middle East,
street clashes flared in the
West Bank, and Israeli troops
shot and killed two Palestinian
teens. It was the latest in a
growing series of violent
incidents. In Bethlehem,
Palestinians threw rocks and
firebombs near Rachel's Tomb,
where
Israel's separation barrier juts
into the city. The Israeli army
said soldiers initially
used tear gas, and then
switched to live rounds.
Three scientists will share this
year's Nobel Prize for Medicine
for critical advances against
parasitic diseases. Irish-born
William Campbell and Japan's
Satoshi Omura share half the
prize
for discovering a drug to treat
river blindness and
elephantiasis. And Tu Youyou of
China
was honored for developing a
powerful anti-malaria drug from
traditional herbal medicine.
Colleagues praised her
steadfast approach.
MAN (through translator): Over
200 prescriptions and dozens of
kinds of traditional Chinese
medicine were used. Her research
started based on this. Then it
took a long time and many
repeated failures. Her team
finally succeeded after trying
around 300 times.
JUDY WOODRUFF: Tu is China's
first Nobel laureate in
medicine.
There's word that German
officials have almost doubled
the number of asylum seekers
they're
expecting this year to 1.5
million. The Bild newspaper
reports the number comes from an
internal government forecast.
The earlier estimate was
800,000.
w and the Gulf states lead to
real relief for people and the
citizens and the businesses
of the Gulf. (ph)
LORETTA LYNCH, U.S.
Attorney General: (ph)
JUDY WOODRUFF: The spill stained
more than 1,300 miles of
coastline and was the largest
environmental disaster in U.S.
history. The settlement includes
Alabama, Florida, Louisiana,
Mississippi and Texas.
The U.S. Homeland Security
Department is reopening a probe
into Secret Service efforts to
discredit
Congressman Jason Chaffetz. It
happened in March, as the Utah
Republican was investigating
agency misconduct. Dozens of
agents looked at his failed 2003
job application, and someone
leaked details. The renewed
investigation comes after the
Secret Service director changed
his version of the incident.
And Wall Street had a bullish
Monday on hopes that the Federal
Reserve will delay raising
interest rates. The Dow Jones
industrial average gained more
than 300 points to close near
16780. The Nasdaq rose 73
points. And the S&P 500 added
35.
Still to come on the "NewsHour":
a major trade deal is reached
with Asia; fallout from the
airstrike in Afghanistan that
hit a hospital; an investigation
into the nation's silent
mass disaster, when people
go missing, and much more.
After nearly a decade of
negotiations and five nights of
round-the-clock talks this
past week, the U.S. and 11 other
Pacific Rim nations announced
the largest trade deal in
a generation today.
The stakes are big.
Together, the countries shown
here, and which include Japan,
Canada, Mexico, Australia,
and Vietnam, make up more than
35 percent of world trade,
totaling some $28 trillion.
But there's substantial
opposition to the accord, called
the Trans-Pacific Partnership.
Jeffrey Brown looks at the deal,
at the compromises and at the
road ahead.
JEFFREY BROWN: It's a
wide-ranging accord that seeks
to lower trade barriers and
expand
agricultural markets.
Among other things, it sets new
rules for labor and
environmental standards, reduces
and phases out thousands of
tariffs on American producers,
provides between five and eight
years of intellectual property
rights for biologic drugs made
here, and makes it easier
for the U.S. to sell dairy
products in countries like
Canada and Japan.
But many provisions are the
subject of deep skepticism and
outright opposition from voices
across the spectrum. And getting
it approved by Congress during
an election year is no
small matter.
Greg Ip is chief economics
commentator for The Wall Street
Journal and the author of
the forthcoming book
"Foolproof," and joins us now.
Welcome back, Greg.
GREG IP, The Wall Street
Journal: Thanks, Jeff.
JEFFREY BROWN: First, an
overview, huge dollar amounts,
right, wide range of areas
covered,
and enormous economic
stakes. It's a big deal.
GREG IP: It's a very big deal.
It's the biggest trade deal that
has been negotiated since
the Uruguay agreement of the
World Trade organization, which
was some 20 years ago.
It's also the first trade
agreement to be negotiated by
the United States under the
Obama presidency. The scope is
very large, roughly 40 percent
of world GDP. It covers
areas that have heretofore not
been covered in agreements of
this size, like services,
like intellectual property.
It's important in geostrategic
terms because it's as important
for the countries that are
in it as the countries that are
not, more importantly China.
JEFFREY BROWN: All right, we
will get to that afterwards.
But in strictly economic terms
first, the Obama administration
and supporters point
to what they see as benefits.
Give us a couple of examples
that they're pointing to that's
in this deal.
GREG IP: Well, there are
specific areas where the United
States is very competitive that
it has had trouble getting to
other countries' markets,
agriculture, for example.
Under the agreement, countries
like Japan and Canada, which
have highly protected dairy
sectors, will have to open up
more to the United States. Then
there are newer industries
where the U.S. is very advanced
like drugs, intellectual
property, high-end services like
accounting and engineering. When
those services are exported to
other countries, signatories
to this agreement can no longer
discriminate against American
companies.
And there will be mechanisms
that American companies that
feel they have been
discriminated
against can challenge countries
in their own courts.
JEFFREY BROWN: You mentioned
intellectual property. That's an
important one and often
has not been part of trade
agreements and was very
difficult to negotiate.
GREG IP: Absolutely.
Well, for example, the United
States has a lot of
research-intensive
pharmaceutical companies.
And it was important to them
that the most advanced drugs
that are called biologics have
12-year patent protection in
other countries, like they do
here.
Now, they didn't get that. They
had a compromise. They will get
like five to eight years of
protection. That's great for the
American pharmaceutical
companies, but perhaps not
so much for some of the
buyers of those drugs.
JEFFREY BROWN: Now, as we have
said, a lot of opposition has
been throughout and will
continue. Point to some of the
particular areas where the
opposition is.
GREG IP: Well, one is the
pharmaceutical biologic
agreement, because people who
worry about
the access by poorer countries
to the most advanced drugs are
afraid that they will be
forced to pay extremely high
prices, because they can no
longer purchase generics on
account
of the longer patent
protection this law provides.
Auto companies may not be happy
that Japan will have more access
to the U.S. automobile
market at a time when American
companies have always struggled
to penetrate the Japanese
market. And at a much larger
level, the criticism of people
like Bernie Sanders,
who is running for president, is
that free trade agreements
always seem to benefit companies
and rich and wealthy people more
than it does the average working
person.
JEFFREY BROWN: Traditional
group, labor -- labor will be --
has already said they're against
many of the parts of this.
GREG IP: That's correct. That's
probably where you're going to
hear the stiffest criticisms.
JEFFREY BROWN: All right, go
back to the geopolitics now,
right, OK, because a lot of this
is in
the context of China, rising
China. Right? China is not part
of this deal.
GREG IP: Correct.
And China couldn't really be
part of this deal because many
of the things the United
States wanted -- for example,
governments may not allow
government-owned companies to
have special privileges -- is
simply not compatible with the
way the Chinese economy is
today,
which remains dominated by
state-owned enterprises.
And so the United States was
adamant that we create a
framework that favors its more
liberal vision of trade. China
is welcome to join, but it is
going to be a while before
China is politically and
economically ready to do that.
And this in the meantime is a
sign of U.S. leadership, at a
time when there's a lot of
uneasiness about the fact that
China's
economy is growing so much and
that it has managed to persuade
other countries to sign
up for its vision of
multilateralism, like the Asian
infrastructure...
(CROSSTALK)
JEFFREY BROWN: It's interesting.
They're not there, but of course
they're very much there.
So, this is seen as, as you say,
MDNM an act of leadership, but
also perhaps a model
for future -- some kind of deal?
GREG IP: Possibly.
But I think, at the same time,
is that one of the big selling
points you will hear from
Barack Obama is that
irrespective of what you think
of the economic pluses and
minuses
of the deal, China is out there
and there is a contest in some
sense between the United
States and China for
economic leadership.
And if the United States doesn't
step forward to write the rules,
China will, and those
rules will not be as friendly
to Americans as U.S. rules.
JEFFREY BROWN: All right, now,
just in our last minute, you
mentioned Bernie Sanders
and you could go through the
list of politicians, right,
because it's a campaign year.
This is going to spin out over
the next couple of months, play
out inevitably in the political
-- in the presidential campaign.
GREG IP: Well, first, we have to
get the text of the agreement.
That will be at least another
month, and then Congress will
probably be asked to vote on it
some time early next year.
They have already voted for
something called trade promotion
authority, which basically
means we will vote yea or nay on
this agreement, but we cannot
amend it. And that vote passed
very, very narrowly. And most
Democrats voted against it. You
shouldn't take for granted
that this will pass.
That said, Republicans, who now
control both houses of Congress,
by and large support free
trade, and so I think they have
a lot to lose by not letting the
president on this one matter
get what he wants.
JEFFREY BROWN: All right,
Greg Ip, thank you so much.
GREG IP: Thank you, Jeff.
JUDY WOODRUFF: The fallout over
a U.S. airstrike on a medical
facility in Afghanistan
continued
today. The incident, which is
being called a war crime by
Doctors Without Borders, took
center stage at the
Pentagon this morning.
GEN. JOHN CAMPBELL, U.S. Army:
If errors were committed, we
will acknowledge them. We will
hold those responsible
accountable, and we will take
steps to ensure mistakes are not
repeated.
JUDY WOODRUFF: That was General
John Campbell, U.S. commander of
coalition forces in Afghanistan,
pledging the facts will come out
about Friday's deadly attack.
The airstrike killed 22 people
at a Doctors Without Borders
hospital in Kunduz, amid heavy
fighting between the Taliban and
Afghan forces.
Some Afghan officials say
Taliban fighters were firing
from inside the hospital, a
charge
that Doctors Without Borders
denies. Initially, the Pentagon
said U.S. troops called in the
airstrikes, but Campbell
changed that account today.
GEN. JOHN CAMPBELL: We have now
learned that on October 3,
Afghan forces advised that they
were taking fire from enemy
positions and asked for air
support from U.S. forces. An
airstrike was then called to
eliminate the Taliban threat,
and several civilians were
accidentally struck.
JUDY WOODRUFF: The general
repeatedly declined to answer
questions about exactly who
authorized
the bombardment.
GEN. JOHN CAMPBELL: That will
come out in the investigation.
I don't want to go into those
great details yet until we get
the investigation, and I
don't want to cover the rules of
engagement in this format at
this point in time.
JUDY WOODRUFF: Campbell also
didn't say if the hospital was
hit by mistake, or if U.S.
air crews verified the
target before firing.
Doctors Without Borders has said
it provided GPS coordinates of
the site to coalition forces
and notified them during the
airstrikes, but to little avail.
Today, the group's general
director, Christopher Stokes,
rejected the latest U.S. version
of
events.
In a statement, he said -- quote
-- "Their description of the
attack keeps changing,
from collateral damage to a
tragic incident to now
attempting to pass
responsibility to
the Afghanistan government. The
need for a full, transparent,
independent investigation
is ever more critical."
As to that, General Campbell
said today the U.S. military,
NATO and Afghanistan are already
investigating.
GEN. JOHN CAMPBELL: If there's
other investigations out there
that need to go on, we will make
sure we coordinate those as
well, but I won't go into those
details here.
JUDY WOODRUFF: Back in Kunduz,
fighting continues on the city
outskirts, with Afghan security
forces trying to drive out any
remaining Taliban. And senior
White House officials tell The
Washington Post that President
Obama is now considering keeping
5,000 troops in Afghanistan
beyond 2016, which had been
the deadline for withdrawal.
JUDY WOODRUFF: Stay with us.
Coming up on the "NewsHour": an
investigation into what happens
when someone goes missing
in the U.S.; and a look ahead to
this year's docket on the
Supreme Court.
But first, Gwen gets the latest
on the race for the White House.
She recorded this conversation
earlier today before
leaving on assignment.
GWEN IFILL: From gun control, to
the e-mail dispute that won't go
away, to a fresh leadership
fight on Capitol Hill,
congressional politics and
presidential politics overlap
this week.
So, we turn to Amy Walter of The
Cook Political Report and Tamara
Keith of NPR reporting tonight
from New Hampshire for our
weekly Monday night look at
what's happening behind the
scenes.
Hillary Clinton today got on the
gun control bandwagon very
forcefully with her own plan.
We want to hear a little
about what she had to say.
And, Tamara, you were in the
room. I want to hear how it went
over.
HILLARY RODHAM CLINTON (D),
Presidential Candidate: We need
to go back and, with all of our
hearts,
working not just in Washington,
but from the grassroots up,
demand that we have universal
background checks. Forty percent
of guns are sold gun shows,
online sales. We need to close
that loophole, so that when we
have a universal background
check...
(APPLAUSE)
HILLARY RODHAM CLINTON: ... it
will cover everybody. We have
got to keep guns out of
the hands of people who
shouldn't have them, domestic
abusers, people with serious
mental
health problems.
GWEN IFILL: Now, of course, this
is a result to what happened in
Oregon last week, the
mass shooting at a community
college, and the president's
very strong words about gun
control and about how we had to
do more than just talk about it.
Tamara, is that what
she was doing as well?
TAMARA KEITH, National
Public Radio: Yes.
And Hillary Clinton has actually
spoken about gun control pretty
forcefully in the last
few months following other mass
shootings, but this time she has
put out a plan, she
has several bullet points that
she's calling for, different
items that she wants.
In the room, this was very
different from many other
Clinton town halls that I have
been to. It was more emotional.
The crowd was almost more into
it, you could say, than
many of her other town halls,
many standing ovations, people
really enthusiastic about
what she's saying and
what she's proposing.
In particular, there was one
moment where Hillary Clinton, as
she was finishing her
remarks, asked a mother to come
up on stage. This is a Sandy
Hook mom whose son, her
6-year-old
son was killed in the
shooting at Sandy Hook.
And as Hillary Clinton talked
about that mom's experience,
Hillary Clinton's voice choked
up a little bit, and it was a
very emotional moment in the
room.
GWEN IFILL: It's interesting,
because, as you know, Amy, we
have had this conversation
many times, and, in fact, the
last time the president came
out, he was accused of sounding
as if he had just given up on
being able to do anything. And
we heard some of that from
Jeb Bush as well. Is there
anything different in this gun
control argument this time?
AMY WALTER, The Cook Political
Report: I don't think very much
has changed at all.
And, in fact, I think this has
become something that we see the
two parties just going back
into their predictable lanes,
Democrats talking about more gun
control, Republicans talking
about how they have to defend
the rights of gun owners. And
this is coming at a time,
also, of a very competitive
primary fight very specifically
on the Republican, but on
the Democratic side as well,
where both sides trying to speak
to their base.
The Democratic base, this is an
issue that's very important to
them, the idea of gun control.
On the Republican side, they are
more concerned with gun rights.
And so you're seeing both
camps just lining up
pretty predictably.
GWEN IFILL: OK. Let's
try something unusual.
You are in New England tonight,
Tamara, where Bernie Sanders had
a big rally in Boston this
weekend. He got 20,000 people
there, yet he doesn't come down
on the same side of the
argument as Hillary Clinton does
on guns. Does that hurt him at
all with his base?
TAMARA KEITH: This is
a fascinating thing.
Bernie Sanders is to the left of
the Democratic field on
absolutely everything, except
for
guns. And when it comes to guns,
he's more moderate. In the '90s,
he voted against the
Brady Bill. In 2005, he voted
for a bill that became law that
shields gun manufacturers
from lawsuits.
Hillary Clinton is trying to
make a big issue out of this.
One of her proposals is to
repeal
that law that Bernie Sanders
voted for and she voted against.
I think that Clinton and
her supporters see this as an
opportunity, and also Martin
O'Malley, the Maryland governor,
sees it, too, to show
differences and, for once, show
that Bernie Sanders is not the
purest candidate on the
left on at least one topic.
AMY WALTER: Yes, and it also
speaks to the demographics of
the issue of guns.
If you look -- and this is
Gallup who did this study. You
look at the kinds of people
who own guns in this country,
they're overwhelmingly white,
many of them are Southern,
they're
male. People who do not own guns
or the lowest rate of gun
ownership, minorities and single
women.
If you want to understand the
politics of the gun debate, who
speaks to overwhelmingly
white Southerners? Republicans.
And for Bernie Sanders, he lives
in an overwhelmingly white
state, older state of Vermont.
This is an issue that plays very
differently in Vermont
than it does in Brooklyn.
GWEN IFILL: Which we can expect
Hillary Clinton to try to
exploit.
But let's talk about something
else she has -- not choosing to
exploit. As we know, she's
been struggling with this e-mail
controversy for some time. And,
somehow, Republicans are
helping her.
Kevin McCarthy, who is in line
to be the speaker of the House,
gave an interview on FOX in
which he said this: "Everybody
thought Hillary Clinton was
unbeatable, right? But we put
together a Benghazi special
committee, a select committee.
What are her numbers today? Her
numbers are dropping. Why?
Because she is untrustable. But
no one would any of that
had that happened."
Well, today, in New Hampshire,
Hillary Clinton pushed back and
said, ah, the horror of this,
it's pure politics and it
proves the point I was making.
So, this was kind of an
opportunity for her today, Tam.
TAMARA KEITH: Absolutely.
And she came out pretty angrily.
This was on "The Today Show."
She was more angry than
I think I have seen her about
the Benghazi committee and about
the controversy over the
e-mails, really saying: Kevin
McCarthy proves my point that
Republicans are just trying
to politicize this.
Now, many of Hillary Clinton
supporters would agree with that
assessment. Others are concerned
about the e-mail issue and it
gets wrapped up in the idea of
trust.
GWEN IFILL: Well, the other
problem, of course, is that just
-- this is -- and Capitol Hill
politics -- this provided an
opportunity for somewhat be to
challenge Kevin McCarthy.
Jason Chaffetz, let's listen to
what he had to say today to some
reporters.
REP. JASON CHAFFETZ (R), Utah: I
think I bring a skill set that's
maybe a little bit more
different, the communications
side of it, making sure you have
got a speaker who's out
there speaking and driving home
the communications side of it.
Internally, I think I have
earned
a reputation of being a fair,
honest broker that can bring
both sides or all sides of
the political spectrum together.
There is some internal strife
and divide that needs
to be bridged.
GWEN IFILL: Now, he was talking
to Lisa Desjardins, our
political director, in that
interview.
Clearly, he's saying, I can
communicate better than this
other guy.
AMY WALTER: Yes.
You notice that he said the word
communication there. He said the
word communication in a
letter he wrote to his
colleagues this weekend, talking
a lot about, if you put me on
national
television, I won't make
these same kind of mistakes.
And, look, what that Benghazi
gaffe revealed for the
Republicans in the House is a
divide
that was always there and a
concern that's always been there
that the new team coming
in is going to have the same
problems as the old team that's
going out. They cannot figure
out how to bring the Republicans
together and they can't figure
out a way for the Republicans
to push a message that looks
like it can bring in a broader
group of voters.
And so now we have had a real
fight for the speakership. This
was supposed to be Kevin
McCarthy's. This was supposed to
be very easy. And talking to
folks on Capitol Hill today,
there's a sense that you know
what? I don't know if anybody
can get to 218 votes right
now, which is the vote
to be the speaker.
GWEN IFILL: And, Tamara, of
course, it's really not so much
about who might be speaker in
the end. Even if Kevin McCarthy
has more votes than Jason
Chaffetz, you still have -- the
fight then begins for
the number two jobs.
TAMARA KEITH: Yes, and that
fight has actually been delayed
a little bit until later in the
month.
The sort of more conservative
hard-line members of the
Republican Caucus are sort of
balking
and saying, wait, you want all
of these people that are
basically allied with John
Boehner?
The whole point of this for them
was to get rid of John Boehner
and to get rid of the
people who sort of represent his
-- he would call it a more
practical viewpoint about what
Republicans in
Congress can get done.
GWEN IFILL: It all becomes parts
of the same loop-de-loop.
Amy, Tamara, thank
you both very much.
JUDY WOODRUFF: Now a story from
our partners at the Center for
Investigative Reporting's
podcast Reveal about Jane and
John Does, America's nameless
dead.
Last month, a baby girl found on
the shore near Boston was
finally identified as Bella
Bond. But there are still
thousands of unknown bodies
waiting for their own
identification
in city morgues and public
cemeteries across the nation.
Reveal's Michael
Schiller has the story.
MICHAEL SCHILLER: Alice
Almendarez and her four sisters
knew something was wrong when
a week went by without
hearing from their father.
ALICE ALMENDAREZ, Daughter: My
dad was a softie. He had five
girls and, I mean, he adored us.
MICHAEL SCHILLER: When Alice
tried to report him missing, she
says the Houston police didn't
take her concerns seriously. She
says that because he had a
criminal record and no permanent
address, the police assumed he
had intentionally left his
family.
ALICE ALMENDAREZ: They told me
that maybe my father didn't want
to be found. Maybe he
was tired of having a family. It
was hard, because you felt like
you were fighting them
to do their job.
MICHAEL SCHILLER: She didn't
learn his fate for 12 years.
ALICE ALMENDAREZ: You can't
celebrate a holiday when there's
somebody missing from the room.
I actually was supposed to get
married, and I didn't get
married because I couldn't get
married without my dad.
MICHAEL SCHILLER: The FBI
estimates that there are some
80,000 reported missing people
on
any given day in the United
States. At the same time, there
are over 10,000 unidentified
bodies. There is no national law
requiring agencies to share this
information, leaving
many families in the dark
about their loved one's fate.
The U.S. Justice Department
calls it the nation's silent
mass disaster.
MICHAEL MURPHY, Clark County
Coroner: Sooner or later, we
have to address this problem.
MICHAEL SCHILLER: After 13 years
as Las Vegas coroner, Michael
Murphy says that, because
there is no unified approach to
reporting Jane and John Does,
bodies go unidentified
far too long.
MICHAEL MURPHY: You could have a
body that was on one side of a
county line, and the
next county could have that
individual reported as missing,
and no one may have talked to
each other.
MICHAEL SCHILLER: In Alice's
case, it happened within the
same Texas county. After 12
years
of searching for her father, she
learned that authorities had
found his body only a few
miles from where she lived, just
weeks after their last visit.
ALICE ALMENDAREZ: If I would
have known the whole time that
my dad was already dead, I
would have had some kind of
peace, knowing that my dad
wasn't starving, wasn't hungry,
wasn't being hurt.
TODD MATTHEWS, Director of Case
Management, NamUs: You know, a
traditional funeral, three
days, you're buried, and then
you find ways to adapt to your
new life. In a missing persons
case, it's like a funeral
that goes on for years.
MICHAEL SCHILLER: Todd Matthews
started out as part of a network
of volunteer sleuths
working on cold cases involving
nameless victims. It's become a
full-time job.
TODD MATTHEWS: My day job is
finding the missing among the
dead.
MICHAEL SCHILLER: After Matthews
identified a body from a 1960s
murder case, the Department
of Justice called on him to help
create a database, the National
Missing and Unidentified
Persons System, or NamUs, the
first ever federal catalogue
that made it possible for anyone
to search official missing
persons and unsolved John and
Jane Doe cases.
He is now the director of
communications and case
management for the NamUs
program. Today,
Matthews is exhuming a body
that's been unidentified for 45
years. The skeletal remains are
believed
to be those of a young woman who
was found dead off a remote
trail in Eastern Kentucky
in 1969, murdered with
stab wounds to the chest.
TODD MATTHEWS: Somebody's
getting away with it. The
criminal aspect of it is,
somebody's
getting away with murder.
MICHAEL SCHILLER: Even with no
formal training in forensics,
Matthews is regarded as an
expert
in identifying human remains.
TODD MATTHEWS: It's just a
matter of having to sit down and
just go through these cases
and find what you're looking
for. The answers are in the
system for a lot of these cases.
MICHAEL SCHILLER: The NamUs
system allows authorities to
automatically perform
cross-matching
comparisons between databases,
searching for similarities.
TODD MATTHEWS: I'm good. We're
at an exhumation in Kentucky
from a 1969 Jane Doe case. So,
I have got some bones.
MICHAEL SCHILLER: The main lab
that the NamUs database relies
on is at the University of
North Texas, where scientists
extract and analyze DNA from
unidentified remains. But,
by itself, this DNA
is not enough.
To make an I.D., there needs to
be a matching source of DNA.
That's why loved ones of missing
persons have gathered in
Houston, Texas, for Family Day,
where volunteer groups and
officials
managing the NamUs database have
gathered along with law
enforcement to get more families
to put their DNA
into the system.
GLORIA ESPARZA, Mother: My son
is missing. His name is Ryan
Jacob Esparza. He's missing
out of Pasadena, Texas. This is
the park that supposedly he was
last seen at.
MICHAEL SCHILLER: Gloria Esparza
brought her family so that their
cheeks could be swabbed.
Their DNA will be compared to
likely matches to see whether
any of the recorded John Does
are Gloria's son.
GLORIA ESPARZA: My world has
been turned upside-down, up and
down, and I want off. I want off
of
this roller coaster.
MICHAEL SCHILLER: Coroner
Michael Murphy in Las Vegas
thinks that connecting the
missing
and the unidentified in one
database is a big step in the
right direction, but there
is still more to do.
MICHAEL MURPHY: There is not a
national requirement or any law
that I'm aware of that says that
coroner medical examiner
offices, law enforcement
agencies or whomever will report
to a database
about unidentified remains.
Connecting this information is
vital to the success of
identifying
the unidentified persons.
SEN. CHRIS MURPHY (D),
Connecticut: That is why I am
here to urge my friends to join
us
in supporting Billy's Law,
legislation that will begin
correcting these problems that
plague our nation's
missing persons system.
MICHAEL SCHILLER: In 2010,
then-Representative Chris Murphy
introduced a bill that would
establish standards for
reporting missing and
unidentified persons. But that
effort
and two following ones failed to
gain broad support. Recently,
now-Senator Murphy sponsored
the bill for a fourth time.
TODD MATTHEWS: I can say there
are agencies, medical examiners,
coroners, law enforcement
that still today don't know
about NamUs. So much as we have
done to get the word out,
free tools, free science, and
still, there are still people
who don't know about it.
MICHAEL SCHILLER: Late last
year, the NamUs program
surpassed more than 10,000
unidentified
bodies in their database, a grim
milestone, but one that
increases the odds that the
missing
will be found.
Alice's father used to be one of
those cases, until 2014, when
Alice submitted her DNA for
comparison. Just a few months
later, there was a match.
ALICE ALMENDAREZ: If everybody
was entered into that database,
then a lot of people would
have the closure, not that they
wanted, but they needed in order
to be able to live again.
MICHAEL SCHILLER: Alice's father
remains buried at the Harris
County Cemetery, where he's
been for 10 years, marked as
an unknown Hispanic male.
Today, Alice is waiting to
exhume his body so she can bury
him in their family cemetery,
using a gravestone
with his real name.
ALICE ALMENDAREZ: No matter what
somebody does, I don't think
they deserve to be buried
as John Doe. My dad had a name.
MICHAEL SCHILLER: For the "PBS
NewsHour," I'm Michael Schiller
from Reveal in Houston,
Texas.
JUDY WOODRUFF: And Reveal has
launched a searchable database
to facilitate matches between
missing
people and identified bodies.
You can find that online at
lostandfound.revealnews.org.
It's the first Monday in
October, and that means the
Supreme Court kicks off its new
term. The court will deal with
several political issues, among
them, affirmative action, voting
rights and labor unions.
For what to look for in the
months ahead, we are joined, as
always, by Marcia Coyle
of "The National Law Journal."
Welcome back to the
program, Marcia.
MARCIA COYLE, "The National Law
Journal": Thanks, Judy. It's
good to be back.
JUDY WOODRUFF: So, it is
developing into a pretty big
term.
MARCIA COYLE: It is, and not
only the cases that the court
has already agreed to hear,
but there are some big ones
waiting in the wings that the
justices are likely to add
to this term's docket.
JUDY WOODRUFF: Now, you were
just telling me that there's a
lot of conversations, before
we get into some of the
specifics, that this -- a lot of
conversation about how this
could
turn out to be a more
conservative term than the last
one.
What did you mean by that?
MARCIA COYLE: Well, so much of a
term's character depends on the
nature of the cases that the
justices take, but it also
depends on if those cases are
controversial and the court is
likely
to split ideologically, Justice
Kennedy is in the middle. He's
the swing vote. And he
tends to vote conservative more
than he does to the left on
certain issues.
And those certain issues are on
the docket, as you mentioned,
affirmative action, voting,
First Amendment, unions.
JUDY WOODRUFF: Well, let's
tackle a few of those, and let's
start with affirmative action.
This is Fisher vs. the
University of Texas.
MARCIA COYLE: Right.
The University of Texas uses
race as one of something like 17
different factors in its
admissions policies. Its goal is
to achieve broader diversity.
This is the second time
this case has come to the
courts. But, several terms ago,
the court sent it back to the
lower
courts because it believed that
the lower courts hadn't applied
strict scrutiny, that
is, that it hadn't found -- it
hadn't first looked at whether
race-neutral alternatives
were used by the university
before using race.
Went back to the lower court.
The lower court once again said,
this program passes
constitutional
muster. Comes back up to the
Supreme Court. And, apparently,
there are four justices,
because you only need the votes
of four, who still want to look
at the use of race to achieve
diversity in higher education.
JUDY WOODRUFF: So, as you say,
the second time before the
court.
Another Texas case, Marcia, this
one on political redistricting,
one person, one vote.
MARCIA COYLE: Right.
And it's hard to believe that
the principle of one person, one
vote is now before the
Supreme Court in a very basic
way. How should you count people
in order to get to one person,
one vote in legislative
districts?
The state of Texas, in fact,
just about every single state
counts total population in order
to get to that. But the
challengers in this case say,
no, you really should count
voting
population, eligible voters. And
the reason it has politically
high stakes is if you go
with voting population, that
tends to benefit rural areas,
where people do vote more and
they tend -- trend
to vote Republican.
If you do it on total
population, which includes not
only voters, but non-citizens,
they tend
to trend Democratic in voting.
JUDY WOODRUFF: So you're going
to capture a bigger group,
including...
MARCIA COYLE: Right. Exactly.
JUDY WOODRUFF: And it raises
probably some questions about...
(CROSSTALK)
MARCIA COYLE: Favored
cities, yes.
JUDY WOODRUFF: So, another case
that we know is coming up has to
do with public sector
labor unions and individuals who
are not paying members,
dues-paying members of these
unions,
but who may receive benefits.
MARCIA COYLE: Well, back in
1977, the Supreme Court decided
a case in which it had to strike
a balance between the First
Amendment rights of non-union
members, as well as unions'
rights.
When they engage in collective
bargaining, the benefits of
collective bargaining also
go to the non-union members
in the public sector.
And the unions look at that as
free-riding. And so the Supreme
Court says the First Amendment
rights of non-union members
really aren't hindered if they
contribute to the cost of
collective bargaining, but they
don't have to pay for the
unions' non-collective
bargaining
activities, like political
lobbying, speech, things like
that.
But in the case before the
Supreme Court, the court is
being asked to overrule that
1977 decision and eliminate the
fees that non-union members pay
to unions. So, the stakes
are very high for public sector
unions, which remain the largest
unions in the country.
JUDY WOODRUFF: And the other
thing, Marcia, as you have told
us, there are a couple of
cases that are, in your words,
in the wings, potentially really
controversial cases.
MARCIA COYLE: Yes.
Yes, there are two petitions
pending, two cases pending right
now involving abortion
clinics and restrictions on how
those clinics operate. This goes
to the sort of art of the
abortion right. How do you
determine what is an undue
burden on a woman's right to
abortion?
Do these restrictions or
regulations, are they an undue
burden and, thus,
unconstitutional?
And in the second group of
cases, there are seven right now
and there probably will be
more, come from religious
nonprofits who are objecting to
how the government accommodate
their objections to
contraceptive health insurance.
JUDY WOODRUFF: Well, it's enough
to keep you very, very busy this
term.
MARCIA COYLE: Potentially
a very big term, Judy.
JUDY WOODRUFF: Marcia Coyle,
thank you. We look forward to
seeing you again soon.
MARCIA COYLE: My pleasure.
JUDY WOODRUFF: Next: the latest
addition to the "NewsHour"
Bookshelf.
In the early 1960s, it was a
city that stood on the threshold
of unlimited possibilities,
but it wasn't to be. Today, some
two years after Detroit declared
bankruptcy, it is slowly
recovering from
decades of decline.
Washington Post editor and
Detroit native David Maraniss
looks at the Motor City of
50 years ago in his new book,
"Once in a Great City: A Detroit
Story."
Jeffrey Brown talked to him
recently at the National Book
Festival here in Washington.
JEFFREY BROWN: So, "Once in a
Great City," you are taking us
back to a great moment,
right, maybe like the
heights, right, of...
DAVID MARANISS, Author, "Once in
a Great City: A Detroit Story":
Well, it's a moment -- the
book takes place between 1962
and 1964, when Motown was
booming, when the Mustang was
being
conceived, when cars were
selling more than ever before,
when Walter Reuther and the
labor
movement were at their peak.
The working people of Detroit
were reaching the middle class.
There was so much luminescence
about the city then, but it was
a luminescence that was also a
dying light.
JEFFREY BROWN: Well, before you
get to the dying light, the
luminescence, what was Detroit
at that moment? Because it's so
easy to forget when you -- given
what we look at now.
DAVID MARANISS: It had 1.7
million people. Now it's down to
700,000.
It had -- the Big Three was
building more cars than ever
before. It had a creative
spirit.
The book -- one of the threads
of the book is creation,
creativity, destruction, decay.
And you see them sort of
intertwined. And it was very
creative at that point. You
could
invent yourself in
Detroit 50 years ago.
JEFFREY BROWN: And, of course,
Motown famously invented itself
and then many wonderful and
famous musicians.
DAVID MARANISS: Totally, yes,
which is one of the key threads
of the book, Berry Gordy
and his family.
I give a lot of due to his
sisters actually. The whole
Gordy family created Motown. And
all of this local talent, it's
just stunning to think about
Smokey Robinson Stevie Wonder,
The Temptations, the Supremes,
Martha Reeves, Mary Wells. All
these great musicians grew
up near each other, and Aretha
Franklin, who wasn't Motown, but
was there.
JEFFREY BROWN: So you have all
the personalities on the
creative side and then you have
personalities
on the business side,
particularly in the auto
industry.
DAVID MARANISS: Yes, Henry Ford
II, the Deuce, HF2, an
incredibly colorful character,
and
then his sometimes enemy,
sometimes ally Walter Reuther of
the UAW, which was at its
powerful
peak then.
JEFFREY BROWN: Yes, another very
large personality, right? Yes.
DAVID MARANISS: Yes.
JEFFREY BROWN: You're writing
saying that the seeds of the
problems to come were already
there.
DAVID MARANISS: One of the
important things to understand
is, when people think about
the decay of Detroit, a lot of
people tend to blame it on three
things, the riots in
1967, the municipal corruption
that followed, and the pension
problems that ensued.
But you could see the structural
problems before that. In 1963,
some great sociologists
at Wayne State predicted exactly
what was going to happen.
Productive people are going
to leave the city. It was a
perfect storm of racial
problems, housing unfairness,
urban
renewal, and the structural
problem of a one-company town.
And all of that together just
created
this problem that
could see in 1963.
JEFFREY BROWN: Did
it happen quickly?
DAVID MARANISS: No, it didn't.
It happened over a decade, more
people leaving every year,
the city's structure changing,
obviously, the auto industry
expanding all over the world
and leaving Detroit behind.
Some very crucial decisions were
happening then, but it took
decades for the full decay
of Detroit and now finally
perhaps its renaissance.
JEFFREY BROWN: Well, before I
ask you about that, I want to
ask you about the creativity
part.
DAVID MARANISS: Yes.
JEFFREY BROWN: Because if the
creativity was all there in
1962-'4, and it was, what
happened
to that?
DAVID MARANISS:
Right. Right. Yes.
JEFFREY BROWN: Because one can
sort of see the structural
problems.
DAVID MARANISS: Well, let me
give you one example of the
creativity that meant the most.
I was trying to figure out, why
did Motown happen? Now, part of
it is Berry Gordy's individual
genius. Another part is it was
that it was a huge geographic
city with single-family
homes and a great piano company
that could get pianos into those
working-class homes.
The people there could afford
the pianos because they had
jobs. And Detroit had great
public
school teachers, music teachers.
They had music at every school.
So, every Motown person I
interviewed, whether it was
Martha Reeves to the Funk
Brothers'
people, would say, I remember
my elementary schoolteacher.
JEFFREY BROWN: And
the piano at home.
DAVID MARANISS: And
JEFFREY BROWN: Because that used
to be the ideal of a
middle-class existence, right?
DAVID MARANISS: Yes, exactly.
So, all of that -- as the jobs
leave, as the school system
shrinks, as music gets pushed
out of the schools, that
created too many...
(CROSSTALK)
JEFFREY BROWN: Yes.
Now, I read that, speaking of
music, Eminem somehow inspired
the book. Explain.
DAVID MARANISS: Yes,
it's a very odd thing.
I was born in Detroit, because
I'm a Green Bay Packers fan
because I have spent most
of my time in Wisconsin.
JEFFREY BROWN: OK. I'm not sure
I will ask you to explain that,
how that worked.
DAVID MARANISS: The 2011 Super
Bowl, Packers are playing, I'm
watching the game in New
York City at a bar.
And, at halftime, I'm not paying
too much attention, until on the
screen I see a commercial
that has the Detroit Freeway
sign, and then this hypnotic
beat starts, and you see Diego
Rivera Detroit industry mural
and the Joe Louis Fist, and
Eminem getting out of the
car, walking into the Fox
Theatre, and say, this is the
Motor City. This is what we do.
JEFFREY BROWN: Yes.
DAVID MARANISS: I teared up.
Why? It's just a commercial. As
my wife told me very clearly,
you know, Detroit is dying,
they're selling cars, and you're
getting emotional.
But that struck a chord with me
about Detroit in a very powerful
way. Made me think, I don't
want to buy a Chrysler, but I do
want to write about the city
from which I came, the city
of my birth, and what
it gave America.
JEFFREY BROWN: Now, you used
earlier this R-word,
renaissance. But is renaissance
fair
enough? Do you see -- what
do you see happening now?
DAVID MARANISS: Well,
it's bifurcated.
Yes, in one sense, about young
-- it's a great place to go if
you're young and want to create.
There's vast swathes of
emptiness, of those 28 miles of
Detroit, you know, and you can
go through miles of it where
three out of every 10 houses are
gone, too of them are
abandoned, that very strong
working class, white and black.
There's a much harder time
coming back.
So, in one sense, you do see it
reinventing itself. But it's a
different Detroit. And
until it deals with those real
structural problems of the
people who were there 50 years
ago building America, then you
can never truly call it a full
renaissance.
JEFFREY BROWN: Are you
hopeful, though, after...
(CROSSTALK)
DAVID MARANISS: I'm
always hopeful, yes.
JEFFREY BROWN: Yes. All right.
"Once in a Great City: A Detroit
Story" by David Maraniss.
Thank you very much.
DAVID MARANISS:
Thank you, Jeffrey.
JEFFREY BROWN: Nice
to talk to you.
DAVID MARANISS: You, too.
JUDY WOODRUFF: Now to another
installment in our Brief But
Spectacular series.
Tonight, Republican political
consultant Fred Davis, who has
created some of the most
memorable
television campaign commercials
over the years, gives us his
take on what makes an ad stick.
FRED DAVIS, Advertising
Consultant: If I adore somebody,
I hope I can make you adore
them.
When I get asked who our clients
are, I try to start from one
part of the country and
move, so I can get them in a
row, Arnold Schwarzenegger,
Carly Fiorina, John McCain, John
Cornyn, Bob
Corker, Lamar Alexander, David
Perdue. And I know I'm leaving
some out, and it isn't
because I don't love you. I
just -- that's a lot of names.
The ad that you probably would
know, much to my dismay, one
picked up the nickname demon
sheep. Probably Carly Fiorina's
demon sheep ad, that could have
been well been a normal
ad about this gentleman, who I
will not name, who was running
against her, who we felt was
not as conservative in reality
as he was saying he was. In
other words, he is a wolf in
sheep's
clothing.
When you're the candidate or
you're in a campaign team, you
don't want to hear that your
best
bet is putting some poor guy in
a fake sheep's outfit. And you
don't want to tell John McCain
that his best bet for winning in
2008 was comparing him to Paris
Hilton.
NARRATOR: He's the biggest
celebrity in the world.
FRED DAVIS: That's not an easy
sell, but those both worked
fabulously.
And here's the problem with most
of the advertising you see. Over
the course of the day, you will
see, what, 500 ads. And you get
home at night, how many of those
do you remember? Probably
this many.
And so my job, I think, it
should be the job of any ad guy,
is to make that one ad that
your client spent so much
hard-earned -- so much tough
time raising money to pay for
that
ad to make it be something
they talked about.
When I was a kid, I was the guy
in the neighborhood who put on
the plays. I would build the
little
control panel. I would have the
lights. I would do all this
excitement stuff. And my
poor little brothers and sister
always had -- and the neighbors
had to be in my plays.
That is not very different
from what I do today.
I'm Fred Davis, and this is my
Brief But Spectacular take on
political advertising.
JUDY WOODRUFF: And that brings
us to our "NewsHour" Shares of
the day, something that caught
our
eye which might be of
interest to you, too.
Tonight, something not for the
faint of heart. China's first
high-altitude glass-bottomed
suspension bridge has opened to
tourists. The pedestrian
walkway, known in English as
the Brave Man's Bridge is nearly
the length of three football
fields. It spans two cliffs
in Shiniuzhai National
Geological Park in Central
China. Visitors daring enough to
walk
on the attraction's one-inch
thick glass get vertigo-inducing
views of the valley floor
600 feet below.
Another case of, it's good
somebody else is there to do it.
On the "NewsHour" online right
now: a closer look at three
winners of the Nobel Prize in
Medicine, including a
traditional herbal medicine
pharmacist who scanned ancient
Chinese texts
for possible remedies
for malaria.
All that and more is on our
Web site, PBS.org/NewsHour.
Tune in later this evening on
"Charlie Rose": actress Claire
Danes on the fifth season of
"Homeland."
And that's the "NewsHour" for
tonight. You can tune in later
this week. On Wednesday,
I head to Iowa to sit down for
an interview with Hillary
Clinton.
I'm Judy Woodruff.
Join us online and again right
here tomorrow evening. For all
of us at the "PBS NewsHour,"
thank you, and good night.